---
layout: default
title: About This Blog
---

I started this blog a couple weeks ago mostly for myself.  I am not trying to attract a ton of traffic or make any money.  I want to practice my writing and potentially entertain some friends.  Because the topics I’m covering on here are relatively diverse, I thought it might be helpful to write a bit more about the audience of the blog.  

Primarily, I see this is my quarantine time capsule.  For the rest of my life, I will look back and see what I was able to accomplish while isolated.  While I may continue adding content here after the quarantine ends, I don’t think I would have gotten to a place where I felt comfortable and excited to share my thoughts publicly if it wasn’t for this forced change in lifestyle.  Having a snapshot of how productive I have been and what I have found fulfilling during this time will likely be a helpful reflection tool for future transitions in my life.  It can also serve as a nice barometer to measure my future self against when I’m tempted to fall into less productive habits.  When I start working again, I’ll have less time for hobbies and exercise.  So, I hope these reflections can be helpful in suggesting which hobbies to prioritize when that transition happens.  I also feel like starting the blog has helped keep me motivated to at least do some learning and writing everyday.  

The other primary audience I have in mind for this blog is a future hiring manager.  I don’t expect any hiring manager to have the time to come and read everything here.  But, I do hope to get hired by someone who is focused enough on hiring the right person that they would take a quick look at what I have put together.  I don’t expect it to replace any interview process; but, I do hope that a hiring manager could poke around and see a bit of my writing and see that it aligns with how I’ve represented myself during the selection process.  

I hope that what I put up is entertaining to some friends and fellow Phish fans.  I hope that some data loving educators or education loving data scientists find some of my insights helpful.  And I hope that whoever stumbles on what I have created learns something that can help them teach themselves a skill or hobby in the future.  I don’t plan to write with the purpose of teaching others how I created models or visuals.  But, I do hope that sharing my thought process is helpful.  
